UPSTREAM.md, before:

# Upstream Source

This plugin is based on the official zellij tab-bar plugin.

## Source

**Repository:** https://github.com/zellij-org/zellij
**Path:** `default-plugins/tab-bar/src/`
**Commit:** `889bd06f447f9d50ee46b8efc7d9970d3693cb96`
**Date:** 2025-10-21
**Message:** Migrate from wasmtime to wasmi (#4449)

## Architecture

All customizations are isolated in `crew.rs`. Upstream files have minimal hooks.

| File | Status | Notes |
|------|--------|-------|
| `line.rs` | Verbatim copy | No modifications |
| `tab.rs` | Verbatim copy | No modifications |
| `main.rs` | Minimal hooks | ~5 hook points (see below) |
| `crew.rs` | Custom | All zellij-crew logic |

## Hooks in main.rs

```rust
mod crew;                           // 1. Import crew module
crew: crew::CrewState,              // 2. State field
crew::on_load(&mut self.crew, &config);        // 3. In load()
crew::on_update(&mut self.crew, &event);       // 4. In update()
crew::on_tab_update(&mut self.crew, &tabs);    // 5. In TabUpdate handler
crew::get_tab_name(&mut self.crew, t);         // 6. In render() loop
```

Also: `pub` visibility on LinePart fields, `PermissionRequestResult` event subscription.

## Syncing with upstream

The tab-bar source changes infrequently. To check for updates:

```bash
cd /path/to/zellij
git log --oneline -5 -- default-plugins/tab-bar/src/
```

To sync (safe - line.rs and tab.rs are verbatim):
```bash
cp /path/to/zellij/default-plugins/tab-bar/src/line.rs src/
cp /path/to/zellij/default-plugins/tab-bar/src/tab.rs src/
```

For main.rs, diff and manually apply the hook pattern:
```bash
diff -u /path/to/zellij/default-plugins/tab-bar/src/main.rs src/main.rs
```

Commit message:

Documentation: Align docs with actual implementation
Major updates to bring documentation in sync with code:

Files updated:
- README.md: Add activity indicators, pipe protocol, hook integration
- UPSTREAM.md: Correct architecture (no crew.rs module)
- DESIGN.md: Update State structures, clarify implemented vs planned
- TESTING.md: Fix test procedures for leader/renderer architecture
- src/main.rs: Remove dead show_position field, add ADR comments

New documentation:
- HOOKS.md: Integration guide for Claude Code, shell hooks, custom tools
- PROTOCOL.md: Pipe protocol specification (crew-state, zellij-crew:status)

Key fixes:
- Removed non-existent config options (rename_custom)
- Documented all 4 required permissions
- Added activity status system documentation (7 states)
- Clarified leader/renderer architecture
- Added ADR comments explaining design decisions
- Fixed compiler warning (unused show_position field)

All changes are documentation-only except removing dead code field.

UPSTREAM.md, after:

# Upstream Source

This plugin is based on the official zellij tab-bar plugin.

## Source

**Repository:** https://github.com/zellij-org/zellij
**Path:** `default-plugins/tab-bar/src/`
**Commit:** `889bd06f447f9d50ee46b8efc7d9970d3693cb96`
**Date:** 2025-10-21
**Message:** Migrate from wasmtime to wasmi (#4449)

## Architecture

This plugin is a full rewrite of the tab-bar with crew functionality fully integrated.

| File | Status | Notes |
|------|--------|-------|
| `line.rs` | Verbatim copy | No modifications from upstream |
| `tab.rs` | Verbatim copy | No modifications from upstream |
| `main.rs` | Complete rewrite | 817 lines - all crew logic integrated |

**Important:** Unlike typical forks, main.rs is NOT a lightly-modified upstream file. It's a complete reimplementation that combines:
- Tab-bar rendering (from upstream)
- Leader/renderer architecture
- Name allocation and tracking
- Activity status system
- Pipe message handling

**There is no separate crew.rs module.** All logic lives in main.rs.

## Syncing with upstream

The tab-bar source changes infrequently. To check for updates:

```bash
cd /path/to/zellij
git log --oneline -5 -- default-plugins/tab-bar/src/
```

To sync (safe - line.rs and tab.rs are verbatim):
```bash
cp /path/to/zellij/default-plugins/tab-bar/src/line.rs src/
cp /path/to/zellij/default-plugins/tab-bar/src/tab.rs src/
```

**WARNING:** Do NOT sync main.rs. It's a complete rewrite and cannot be mechanically merged with upstream. If upstream changes tab-bar's API or event handling, manual porting is required.
